# Reflection

The real estate market is a very opaque thing. For a long time now, I’ve been wondering what the obstacles are to owning a home. Of course, the obvious obstacle is that a home is very expensive, especially in a country where most people live paycheck to paycheck, but when I discovered that monthly mortgage payments are often far less expensive than rent, with the added benefit of actually owning the place in which you live, I wanted to know more about what it would take to own property in the United States.

Part of the research process included understanding what it takes for banks to lend people enough money to buy a house. It turns out that the problem is not so much the monthly payments as it is the down payment. The calculator I implemented ended up using this research as part of its core, but when 20% of a $100,000+ mortgage is over $20,000, the primary issue of housing affordability becomes clear. In order to actually afford these houses, you need to have the down payment saved up, and a lot of people don’t for a lot of reasons.

Another important part of the calculator, which lies at the core of this project, is that no more than 30% of your gross income should go to housing. According to [this article by Sam Dogen, a finance blogger](https://www.cnbc.com/2020/09/10/always-use-the-30-30-3-rule-before-buying-a-home-during-pandemic-says-finance-real-estate-expert.html), “traditionally, the industry advises that your monthly mortgage should not exceed 30% of your gross income.” That concept formed the baseline for the calculator, but it’s extremely conservative as an estimate. [This paper by Herbert, Hermann, and McCue](https://www.jchs.harvard.edu/sites/default/files/media/imp/Harvard_JCHS_Herbert_Hermann_McCue_measuring_housing_affordability.pdf)
affirms that 30% is good overall, but not perfect—it tends to “overstate housing affordability challenges for high cost markets and for higher-income and smaller households.” The overstatement is definitely a challenge, but is somewhat mitigated by the fact that if you’re looking for affordable property, you’d be more likely to look for a cheaper home anyway—you’re not really looking to hit the 30% floor.

Something I was able to extrapolate by exploring my own visualization the way that I wanted others to explore it was that the majority of zip codes experienced a major dip in the years 2011-2013, then shot right back up in the following years. The explanation for this is that after the housing market crashed in 2008 (the famous “bubble”), prices might have tumbled, but the reflection of those prices in the property values actually took a while to manifest—it’s one thing to have to underprice your house to sell it, and quite another thing to have that house on the market for a while until it loses its value.

When I started this project, I knew that I wanted a choropleth to be a major part of it. As mentioned, I’d been doing personal research on the housing market for a few months, and something I kept running up against was the map full of markers. Personally, I get really overwhelmed seeing so many markers on a single map, so my goal here was to provide an entry point for people like me who like to get a broader sense of what they’re looking for before diving into the details. I wanted to keep things simple and interactive, but effective at the same time. I didn’t so much want to tell a story as to allow my users to find their own stories, and I thought a dashboard would be the best way to do so.

I iterated on the dashboard design a lot during the process, sketching out different variations, trying to figure out what would work best on mobile versus desktop, and overall, aiming for something that would actually be usable as an end product. The line graph and summary statistics were decided upon last, mainly because I wasn’t sure what aspects of the data I wanted to bring out, but in the end, I thought that a timeline might be best—you can’t see much of the price changes over time on the map itself, beyond what they were in 2009 versus 2019, so the line graph took care of that. In line with the idea of keeping it simple, I ended up tossing a lot of my ideas that were too complex (for example, I had at some point thought about creating a calendar heat map to illustrate change over the months and years, but decided the cognitive load on the user would have been too great, and then I considered a horizontal bar chart, but thought it might take up too much space).

The most challenging part of this project was just learning how to use a new package in conjunction with d3. I wanted to use a framework to make the app more performant, but in the end, it was difficult enough trying to figure out what I could and couldn’t do with Mapbox, and how I could use d3 to make the work easier. I think if I had to do it again, I would ask for more help from experienced users of the package.

My best suggestion to someone who is coming into this subject matter is to do your research as if you’re actually going to buy a house. A lot of things in the housing market are purposefully vague or confusing, such as the way that interest is calculated (it’s “compounding” on paper, but you pay the interest off first so that it never actually gets a chance to compound—this caused me a bit of frustration when I was initially designing the calculator), so it’s best to come at it from an angle of gathering as much information as you can so that you can use it to your advantage.

I’m planning on iterating on this project in the future with an update to the calculator as well as implementation of a slider atop the map so that the choropleth will update via the slider and show changes in the entire US from year to year. I also plan to implement Vue to make the app more performant, and adjust how I have the map render colors in order to reduce the load on Mapbox’s style layers. The calculator in particular, I want to adjust for calculating whether a bank might decide to actually lend to you, which would involve far more inputs than I currently have. I think with all of these aspects put together, this tool could be even more useful than it already is.
